Update nginx conf for api v3 and prometheus (#49)
trento-project/docs: guides/manual-installation.md

This document covers the steps to manually install Trento server. The latest available version of SUSE Linux Enterprise Server for SAP Applications is used as the base operating system, which is [SLE 15 SP5](https://www.suse.com/download/sles/) at the time of writing.
For installations on Service Packs other than SP5, ensure to update the repository address as indicated in the respective notes provided throughout this guide.

**Supported Service Packs**:

- SP3
- SP4
- SP5

## List of dependencies

- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [RabbitMQ](https://rabbitmq.com/)
- [NGINX](https://nginx.org/en/)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) (optional)
- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) (optional)

> ## Install Trento dependencies

Reviewer: Are you talking about the server or the agent dependencies?

### Install Prometheus (Optional)

> [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is not required to run Trento, but it is recommended as it allows Trento to display a series of charts for each host with useful information about the CPU load, memory and other important metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is not required to run Trento, but it is recommended as it allows Trento to display a series of charts for each host with useful information about the CPU load, memory, and other important metrics.
```

> > **Note:** If you choose not to install Prometheus or to provide an existing installation, ensure that `CHARTS_ENABLED` is set to false in the Trento web RPM configuration file or when it is provided to the Trento web container. Refer to [Install Trento server components](#install-trento-server-components).

Reviewer: Where is this "Trento web RPM configuration file" located?

#### <a id="prometheus_install_option_1"></a>Option 1: Use existing installation

Minimal required Prometheus version is **2.28.0**.

> If you have an [existing Prometheus server](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/), ensure to set the PROMETHEUS_URL environment variable with your Prometheus server's URL as part of the Docker command when creating the trento-web container or configuring the rpm's. Use [Trento's Prometheus configuration](#prometheus_trento_configuration) as a reference to adjust the Prometheus configuration.

Reviewer: Is the `trento-web` an existing name? If yes, put it in backticks:

```suggestion
If you have an [existing Prometheus server](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/), ensure to set the PROMETHEUS_URL environment variable with your Prometheus server's URL as part of the Docker command when creating the `trento-web` container or configuring the RPM packages. Use [Trento's Prometheus configuration](#prometheus_trento_configuration) as a reference to adjust the Prometheus configuration.
```

#### Option 2: Install Prometheus using the **unsupported** PackageHub repository

[PackageHub](https://packagehub.suse.com/) packages are tested by SUSE, but they do not come with the same level of support as the core SLES packages. Users should assess the suitability of these packages based on their own risk tolerance and support needs.

1.  Enable PackageHub repository:

    ```bash
    SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.5/x86_64
    ```

>     > **Note:** SLE15 SP3 requires a provided Prometheus server. The version available through **SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.3/x86_64** is outdated and is not compatible with Trento's Prometheus configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note:** SLE15 SP3 requires a provided Prometheus server. The version available through `SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.3/x86_64` is outdated and is not compatible with Trento's Prometheus configuration.
```

    > Refer to [Option 1: Use existing installation option](#prometheus_install_option_1) for SLE 15 SP3.

    > **Note:** Using SLE15 SP4 requires changing the repository `SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.4/x86_64`

1.  Add the Prometheus user/group:

    ```bash
    groupadd --system prometheus
    useradd -s /sbin/nologin --system -g prometheus prometheus
    ```

1.  Install Prometheus using zypper:
    ```bash
    zypper in golang-github-prometheus-prometheus
    ```
    > **Note:** In case the missing dependency can't be satisfied we have already added the Prometheus user/group. With this, it is safe to proceed with the installation by choosing Solution 2: break golang-github-prometheus-prometheus

1.  <a id="prometheus_trento_configuration"></a>Change Prometheus configuration by replacing the configuration at `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml` with: 

>     ```bash

Reviewer: Shouldn't that be YAML?

```suggestion
    ```yaml
```

    global:
      scrape_interval: 30s
      evaluation_interval: 10s

    scrape_configs:
      - job_name: "http_sd_hosts"
        honor_timestamps: true
        scrape_interval: 30s
        scrape_timeout: 30s
        scheme: http
        follow_redirects: true
        http_sd_configs:
          - follow_redirects: true
            refresh_interval: 1m
            url: http://localhost:4000/api/prometheus/targets
    ```

    > **Note:** **localhost:4000** in **url: http://localhost:4000/api/prometheus/targets** refers to the location where Trento web service is running.

1.  Enable and start the Prometheus service:

    ```bash
    systemctl enable --now prometheus
    ```

> 1.  Allow Prometheus to be accessible from docker and add an exception on firewalld **(ONLY if firewalld is running)**: 

Reviewer: I would place the condition at first:

```suggestion
1.  If firewalld is running, allow Prometheus to be accessible from Docker and add an exception on firewalld: 
```

    ```bash
    firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-port=9090/tcp --permanent
    firewall-cmd --reload
    ```

### Install PostgreSQL
This guide was tested with the following PostgreSQL version:

- **13.9 for SP3**
- **14.10 for SP4**
- **15.5 for SP5**
 
Using a different version of PostgreSQL may require different steps or configurations, especially when changing the major number. For more details, refer to the official [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/).

1. Install PostgreSQL server:
    ```bash
    zypper in postgresql-server
    ```

1. Enable and start PostgreSQL server:

    ```bash
    systemctl enable --now postgresql
    ```

#### Configure PostgreSQL

1. Start `psql` with the `postgres` user to open a connection to the database:
    ```bash
    su - postgres
    psql
    ```
1. Initialize the databases in `psql` console:
      ```sql
      CREATE DATABASE wanda;
      CREATE DATABASE trento;
      CREATE DATABASE trento_event_store;
      ```

> 1.  Create the users:

Reviewer: Be careful, sometimes Markdown requires a new line between the list. Be more generous and introduce some newlines between the list item. :wink:

    ```bash
    host   wanda                      wanda_user    0.0.0.0/0   md5
    host   trento,trento_event_store  trento_user   0.0.0.0/0   md5
    ```

    > **Note:** The `pg_hba.conf` file works in a sequential fashion. This means, that the rules positioned on the top have preference over the ones coming next. This examples shows a pretty permissive address range, so in order to work, they entries must be written in the top of the `host` entries. Find additional information in the [pg_hba.conf](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-pg-hba-conf.html) documentation.

1.  Allow PostgreSQL to bind on all network
    interfaces in `/var/lib/pgsql/data/postgresql.conf` by changing the following line:

    ```bash
    listen_addresses = '*'
    ```

1.  Restart PostgreSQL to apply the changes:

    ```bash
    systemctl restart postgresql
    ```

### Install RabbitMQ

1.  Install RabbitMQ server:
    ```bash
    zypper install rabbitmq-server
    ```

1.  The agent needs to reach RabbitMQ, allow connections from external hosts by modifying `/etc/rabbitmq/rabbitmq.conf`:

>     ```bash

Reviewer: It's some INI(?) config, but not bash. Maybe use this:

```suggestion
    ```ini
```

    listeners.tcp.default = 5672
    ```

1.  Add an exception on firewalld **(ONLY if firewalld is running)**:

    ```bash
    firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-port=5672/tcp --permanent;
    firewall-cmd --reload
    ```

1.  Enable RabbitMQ service:

    ```bash
    systemctl enable --now rabbitmq-server
    ```

#### Configure RabbitMQ

> In order to configure RabbitMQ for a production system, follow the official suggestions [RabbitMQ guide](https://www.rabbitmq.com/production-checklist.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure RabbitMQ for a production system, follow the official suggestions [RabbitMQ guide](https://www.rabbitmq.com/production-checklist.html)
```

1.  Create a new RabbitMQ user:
    ```bash
    rabbitmqctl add_user trento_user trento_user_password

>     ```

Reviewer: Can this be executed as normal user or do you need root privileges?

Author: It depends if this is a virtual machine, a cloud machine, normally we run everything with root access level.

Reviewer: Okay. Would sudo be useful then?

#### Install Docker container runtime

1. Enable the container`s module:

    ```bash
    SUSEConnect --product sle-module-containers/15.5/x86_64
    ```
    > **Note:** Using a different Service Pack than SP5 requires to change repository: [SLE15 SP3: `SUSEConnect --product sle-module-containers/15.3/x86_64`,SLE15 SP4: ` SUSEConnect --product sle-module-containers/15.4/x86_64`]

> 1. Install docker:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install Docker:
```

    ```bash
    zypper install docker
    ```

1. Enable and start Docker:

    ```bash
    systemctl enable --now docker
    ```

> #### Create a dedicated docker network for Trento

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a dedicated Docker network for Trento
```

> 1. Create trento docker network:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the Trento Docker network:
```

    ```bash
    docker network create trento-net
    ```

>     > **Note:** When creating the trento-net network, Docker typically assigns a default subnet: `172.17.0.0/16`. Ensure that this subnet matches the one specified in your PostgreSQL configuration file, which can be found at `/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`. If the subnet of `trento-net` differs from `172.17.0.0/16` then adjust `pg_hba.conf` and restart postgresql.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note:** When creating the trento-net network, Docker typically assigns a default subnet: `172.17.0.0/16`. Ensure that this subnet matches the one specified in your PostgreSQL configuration file (refer tp `/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`.) If the subnet of `trento-net` differs from `172.17.0.0/16` adjust `pg_hba.conf` and restart PostgreSQL.
```

> 1. Verifying the subnet of trento-net:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify the subnet of trento-net:
```

    ```bash
    docker network inspect trento-net  --format '{{range .IPAM.Config}}{{.Subnet}}{{end}}'
    ```

    Expected output:

    ```bash
    172.17.0.0/16
    ```

#### Install Trento on docker

> The environment variables listed here are examples and should be considered as placeholders. Instead of specifying environment variables directly in the docker run command, it is recommended to use an environment variable file. Store your environment variables in a file and use the --env-file option with the docker run command. Find detailed instructions on how to use an environment variable file with Docker on [official Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/run/#env).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The environment variables listed here are examples and should be considered as placeholders. Instead of specifying environment variables directly in the `docker run` command, it is recommended to use an environment variable file. Store your environment variables in a file and use the --env-file option with the `docker run` command. Find detailed instructions on how to use an environment variable file with Docker on [official Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/run/#env).
```

1. Create the secret environment variables:

    ```bash
    WANDA_SECRET_KEY_BASE=$(openssl rand -out /dev/stdout 48 | base64)
    TRENTO_SECRET_KEY_BASE=$(openssl rand -out /dev/stdout 48 | base64)
    ACCESS_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET=$(openssl rand -out /dev/stdout 48 | base64)

>     REFRESH_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET=$(openssl rand -out /dev/stdout 48 | base64)

Reviewer: I'm confused. When you already recommend in the last paragraph to use an environment file, why are these variables not inserted in the file?

Author: The honest answer is that this part was created at different times :)

Normally, it is a good practice to create an env file with secrets, and use it.... but it is easier for the user to just copy and paste the commands when reading the documentation for the first time. 
Every Reader, who is familiar with docker, will know how to adjust this, if you would prefer to change this, we can rework this part.

Reviewer: My point was that it looks really odd to recommend something, but then deviate and don't follow your own recommendation. :wink:

As the user also goes through the procedure step by step, I think we should follow this recommendation: create a env file and use that.

        -c "/app/bin/wanda eval 'Wanda.Release.init()' && /app/bin/wanda start"
    ```

1. Install trento-web on docker

    > **Note:** Be sure to change the `ADMIN_USERNAME` and `ADMIN_PASSWORD`, these are the credentials that will be required to login to the trento-web UI.

    > **Note:** Add `CHARTS_ENABLED=false` if Prometheus is not installed or you don't want to use the charts feature of Trento.

    ```bash
    docker run -d \
    -p 4000:4000 \
    --name trento-web \
    --network trento-net \
    --add-host "host.docker.internal:host-gateway" \
    -e AMQP_URL=amqp://trento_user:trento_user_password@host.docker.internal/vhost \
    -e ENABLE_ALERTING=false \
    -e DATABASE_URL=ecto://trento_user:web_password@host.docker.internal/trento \
    -e EVENTSTORE_URL=ecto://trento_user:web_password@host.docker.internal/trento_event_store \
    -e PROMETHEUS_URL='http://host.docker.internal:9090' \
    -e SECRET_KEY_BASE=$TRENTO_SECRET_KEY_BASE \
    -e ACCESS_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET=$ACCESS_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET \
    -e REFRESH_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET=$REFRESH_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET \
    -e ADMIN_USERNAME='admin' \
    -e ADMIN_PASSWORD='test1234' \

>     -e ENABLE_API_KEY='true' \

Reviewer: Same here: When you already recommend to use an environment file, why don't you follow this here? This would make the whole command a lot easier to digest.

Maybe you need to introduce another step.

Author: We need to use the same env for SECRET_KEY_BASE and ACCESS_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET for web and wanda.  The REFRESH_TOKEN_ENC_SECRET differs.

We could store them in a configuration file, but I think every experienced docker user would adjust this, as he requires. 

If these steps don't work well with the whole structure of the official docs, we surely can adjust them :+1:

    -e ALERT_SENDER=<<SENDER_EMAIL_ADDRESS>> \
    -e ALERT_RECIPIENT=<<RECIPIENT_EMAIL_ADDRESS>> \
    -e SMTP_SERVER=<<SMTP_SERVER_ADDRESS>> \
    -e SMTP_PORT=<<SMTP_PORT>> \
    -e SMTP_USER=<<SMTP_USER>> \
    -e SMTP_PASSWORD=<<SMTP_PASSWORD>> \
    
    ...[other settings]...
    ```

2. Check that everything is running as expected:

    ```bash
    docker ps
    ```

    Expected output:

    ```bash
    CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                                         COMMAND                  CREATED          STATUS          PORTS                                       NAMES
    8b44333aec39   registry.suse.com/trento/trento-web:2.2.0    "/bin/sh -c '/app/bi…"   6 seconds ago    Up 5 seconds    0.0.0.0:4000->4000/tcp, :::4000->4000/tcp   trento-web
    e859c07888ca   registry.suse.com/trento/trento-wanda:1.2.0   "/bin/sh -c '/app/bi…"   18 seconds ago   Up 16 seconds   0.0.0.0:4001->4000/tcp, :::4001->4000/tcp   wanda
    ```

    Both containers should be running and listening on the specified ports.

### Validate the health status of trento web and wanda
Trento web and wanda services correct functioning could be validated accessing the ```healthz``` and ```readyz``` api.

> 1. Test Trento web health status with curl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Test Trento web health status with `curl`:
```

    ```bash
    curl http://localhost:4000/api/readyz;
    ```
    ```bash
    curl http://localhost:4000/api/healthz;
    ```

> 2.  Test Trento wanda health status with curl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Test Trento wanda health status with `curl`:
```

    ```bash
    curl http://localhost:4001/api/readyz
    ```
    ```bash
    curl http://localhost:4001/api/healthz
    ```
    

Expected output if Trento web/wanda is ready and the database connection is setup correctly:
```
{"ready":true}{"database":"pass"}
```

## Prepare SSL certificate for NGINX

Create or provide a certificate for [NGINX](https://nginx.org/en/) to enable SSL for Trento.

> This is a basic guide for creating a self-signed certificate for use with Trento. You may use your own certificate. For detailed instructions, consult the [OpenSSL documentation]((https://www.openssl.org/docs/man1.0.2/man5/x509v3_config.html)).

Reviewer: Are these double parenthesis correctly rendered?

Author: Yeah funny, they are, but I will remove the duplicate :+1:

    ```

### Option 2: Using Let's Encrypt for a Signed Certificate using PackageHub repository

> **Note:** Using a different Service Pack than SP5 requires to change repository: [SLE15 SP3: `SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.3/x86_64`,SLE15 SP4: `SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.4/x86_64`].
> Users should assess the suitability of these packages based on their own risk tolerance and support needs.

1.  Add PackageHub if not already added:

    ```bash
    SUSEConnect --product PackageHub/15.5/x86_64
    zypper refresh
    ```

1.  Install Certbot and its Nginx plugin:

    ```bash
    zypper install certbot python3-certbot-nginx
    ```

1. Obtain a certificate and configure Nginx with Certbot:
    > **Note:** Replace `example.com` with your domain. For more information, visit [Certbot instructions for Nginx](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions?ws=nginx&os=leap)

    ```bash
    certbot --nginx -d example.com -d www.example.com
    ```

    > **Note:** Certbot certificates last for 90 days. Refer to the above link for details on how to renew periodically.

## Install and configure NGINX

1. Install NGINX package:

    ```bash
    zypper install nginx
    ```

> 1. Add firewalld exceptions for HTTP and HTTPS **(ONLY if firewalld is running)**:

Reviewer: I would put the if at a first thing:

```suggestion
1. If firewalld is running, add firewalld exceptions for HTTP and HTTPS:
```

    ```bash
    firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-service=https --permanent
    firewall-cmd --zone=public --add-service=http --permanent
    firewall-cmd --reload
    ```
1. Start and enable nginx:

    ```bash
    systemctl enable --now nginx
    ```

1. Create a configuration file for Trento:

    ```bash
    vim /etc/nginx/conf.d/trento.conf
    ```

1. Add the following configuration to `/etc/nginx/conf.d/trento.conf`:

>     ```bash

Reviewer: That's not a bash file. Not sure which format it have, but maybe use a different entry. Or remove the entry.

Author: Removed

        ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
        ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:10m;

        # Wanda rule
        location ~ ^/(api/checks|api/v1/checks|api/v2/checks|api/v3/checks)/  {
            allow all;

            # Proxy Headers
            proxy_http_version 1.1;
            proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
            proxy_set_header Host $http_host;
            proxy_set_header X-Cluster-Client-Ip $remote_addr;

            # Important Websocket Bits!
            proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
            proxy_set_header Connection "upgrade";

            proxy_pass http://localhost:4001;
        }

        # Web rule
        location / {
            proxy_http_version 1.1;
            proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
            proxy_set_header Connection 'upgrade';
            proxy_set_header Host $host;
            proxy_cache_bypass $http_upgrade;

            # The Important Websocket Bits!
            proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
            proxy_set_header Connection "upgrade";
            proxy_set_header Origin "";

            proxy_pass http://localhost:4000;
        }
    }
    ```

> 1. Check NGINX Configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check NGINX configuration:
```

Both containers should be running and listening on the specified ports.

### Validate the health status of trento web and wanda

> Validate the health status of the Trento web and wanda services locally by accessing the ```healthz``` and ```readyz``` api.

Reviewer 2: I would put `Trento web and wanda services correct functioning could be validated accessing the...`

Test Trento web health status with curl:

```
curl http://localhost:4000/api/readyz; curl http://localhost:4000/api/healthz; echo
```

Test Trento wanda health status with curl:
```
curl http://localhost:4001/api/readyz; curl http://localhost:4001/api/healthz; echo
```

Expected output if Trento web/wanda is ready and the database connection is setup correctly:
```
{"ready":true}{"database":"pass"}
```

### Prepare SSL certificate and install Nginx

Create or provide a certificate for [nginx](https://nginx.org/en/) to enable SSL for Trento.

#### Option 1: Creating a Self-Signed Certificate

> > **Note:** This is a basic guide for creating a self-signed certificate for use with Trento. You may use your own certificate. For detailed instructions, consult the [OpenSSL documentation]((https://www.openssl.org/docs/man1.0.2/man5/x509v3_config.html)).

Reviewer 3: Now that I think about it, it might be wise to add a note here so that people that go with the self-signed certificate option know that they have to follow the steps described in `#### Configuring the Agent host with the Self-Signed Certificate`.

    ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:10m;

    # Wanda rule

>     location ~ ^/(api/checks|api/v1/checks|api/v2/checks|api/v3/checks)/  {

Author: Hey @nelsonkopliku and @dottorblaster, we currently have redirect rules for this list of endpoints. What about suma integration? 
Do we need more rules?

Reviewer 4: hey @EMaksy nope. Nothing suma related need at this level. It is all within trento APIs

api-key: <<TRENTO_API_KEY>>
```

> > **Note:** Depending on your setup, adjust the configuration of `/etc/hosts` in order to point the server url https://trento.example.com.

Reviewer 3: I'd add a bit more information here about how this is a hack and that it's expected to have proper name resolution in place. But still, useful for a quick test :+1:

Author: I moved this whole part to another document, as the manual installation guide will be included in the official documentation. So we still have the information, in case we need it.
